[RLlib] Add examples and docs for Catalog (#33898)
ray-project/ray: doc/source/rllib/rllib-catalogs.rst

.. include:: /_includes/rllib/rlmodules_rollout.rst

.. _rllib-catalogs-user-guide:

Catalogs
========

> Catalogs are where RL Modules primarily get their models and action distributions from.

Reviewer: The `Catalog` is a tool that helps create default models and action distributions for RLModules to work with environments with any action and observation spaces. It provides an interface for constructing pre-made components like an MLP for policies that have continuous action spaces, and an action distribution (like a multivariate Gaussian) that matches that action space.

> Catalogs are where RL Modules primarily get their models and action distributions from.

Author: Mhhh. I do this 5 lines below.
I don't see it being the first sentence in the RLModules docs either: https://docs.ray.io/en/master/rllib/rllib-rlmodule.html
.. or in other docs we have.
Why would it be different here?

> Catalogs are where RL Modules primarily get their models and action distributions from.

Author: Maybe put it second or third? Like, the first sentence should be a very general, high-level description of what user is looking at I think.

> Catalogs are where RL Modules primarily get their models and action distributions from.

Reviewer 2: Catalog is a secondary concept compared to RLModules and a lot of users (high-level API users) do not need to know about it unless they want to do some sort of extension to RLModules, that's why I think this is different. 

You can add it in a note format, similar to how the initial note is structured in RLModules. 
<img width="765" alt="image" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/31483498/230800528-be73c654-af8d-480b-8737-cb09f1dcc012.png">

Something like 

Note: This abstraction is intended for advanced users who are interested in extending the functionality of build-in `~ray.rllib.core.rl_module.rl_module.RLModule` objects.

> Catalogs are where RL Modules primarily get their models and action distributions from.

Author: Ok I agree.
Do you think we should add a similar matrix here?
Because afaics, 4 of the 5 columns here of at are actually Catalog features.

> Catalogs are where RL Modules primarily get their models and action distributions from.

Author: I personally think it should be enough to have this matrix with RLModules.

> Catalogs are where RL Modules primarily get their models and action distributions from.

Reviewer 2: totally. I didn't mean to use this text, I meant to use the theme, i.e. the `..note:: ` syntax.

    .. dropdown:: **MODEL_DEFAULTS dict**
        :animate: fade-in-slide-down

        This dict (or an overriding sub-set) is part of AlgorithmConfig and therefore also part of any
        algorithm-specific config. You can override its values and pass it to an AlgorithmConfig
        to change the behavior RLlib's default models.

        .. literalinclude:: ../../../rllib/models/catalog.py
            :language: python
            :start-after: __sphinx_doc_begin__
            :end-before: __sphinx_doc_end__

While Catalogs have a base class, you mostly interact with Algorithm-specific Catalogs.
Therefore, this doc also includes examples around PPO from which you can extrapolate to other algorithms.
Prerequisites for this user guide is a rough understanding of RLModules.
After reading this user guide you will be able to…

    - Instantiate and interact with a Catalog
    - Inject your custom models into RLModules
    - Inject your custom action distributions into RLModules
    - Extend RLlib’s selection of Models and distributions with your own
    - Write a Catalog from scratch

> Instantiate and interact with a Catalog

Author: That's how I started out, @angelinalg wished for headings to reflect the list right above, such that people can go from that list right to the section they are interested in.

> Instantiate and interact with a Catalog

Reviewer 2: I think that the list needs to also be updated to match this. So both should become `Basic Usage`. This is not in conflict with the point brought up by @angelinalg. The headings in my opinion should be short but also precise.

> Instantiate and interact with a Catalog

Author: Gotcha!

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> The following three examples show variations of basic interaction with RLLib’s Catalogs.

Author: Great idea, thanks!

> The following three examples show variations of basic interaction with RLLib’s Catalogs.

Reviewer 2: I think drop down menu is a better UX for this in particular

> The following three examples show variations of basic interaction with RLLib’s Catalogs.

Author: Thanks, changed.

We create models as well as distributions and step through an environment with them.

.. tabbed:: Basic interaction

    In this example, we showcase the general API for interacting with Catalogs.

    .. literalinclude:: ../../../rllib/examples/catalog/basics/basic_interaction.py
       :language: python
       :start-after: __sphinx_doc_begin__
       :end-before: __sphinx_doc_end__

.. tabbed:: PPOCatalog + CartPole

    In this example, we showcase how to use the PPOCatalog to create models and an action distribution.
    This is more similar to what RLlib does internally.

    .. literalinclude:: ../../../rllib/examples/catalog/basics/cartpole_models_ppo.py
       :language: python
       :start-after: __sphinx_doc_begin__
       :end-before: __sphinx_doc_end__

> .. tabbed:: Catalog + Custom Model + CartPole

Author: Mhhh. My idea was that "Basic interaction" is shown first and only if people click on these two others example tabs, they see this more advanced stuff.
We can also simply leave it out, I find it helpful to mentally connect Catalogs and Models though.

    In this example, we showcase how to use the base Catalog to create an encoder and an action distribution.
    Besides these, we create a head network that fits these two by hand to show how you can combine RLLib's
    ModelConfig API and Catalog. Extending Catalog to also build this head is how Catalog is meant to be
    extended, which we cover later in this guide.

    .. literalinclude:: ../../../rllib/examples/catalog/basics/cartpole_models.py
       :language: python
       :start-after: __sphinx_doc_begin__
       :end-before: __sphinx_doc_end__

What are Catalogs
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> Catalogs have two primary roles: Choosing the right model and choosing the right action distribution.

Author: I think we should prefer a simple style if it is not at the loss of precision.
@angelinalg wdyt?

> Catalogs have two primary roles: Choosing the right model and choosing the right action distribution.

Reviewer 3: Yes, I tend to agree with simplicity, as long as you are not compromising technical accuracy.

By default, all catalogs implement decision trees that choose these based on a range of inputs.
These include mainly the observation- and action-space of the RLModule, the model config dict and the tensor backend.
Catalogs are also similar to what was called ModelCatalog in earlier versions of RLlib, but are more flexible.

.. tabbed:: Catalogs vs RLModules

    The following, broken down, diagram shows the general flow of information towards models and distributions.
    RLModules create an instance of the Catalog class they receive as part of their constructor.
    They then create their internal models and action distributions with the help of this Catalog.

    .. note::
      You can also modify the models and distributions in RLModules directly by overriding their constructor!

    .. image:: images/catalog/catalog_and_rlm_diagram.svg
        :align: center

> .. tabbed:: PPOCatalog vs PPORLModule

Author: Got it.
What do you think about drop-downs?
I want to shield users from lenthy code sections that are not 100% relevant for what comes later in the doc.
Then, you can read through the doc with ease until you hit a section that you want to expand on because you have hit the depth that suits your use case.
For example here, you would not see the content of "PPOCatalog vs PPORLModule".

> .. tabbed:: PPOCatalog vs PPORLModule

Reviewer 2: I think drop down makes more sense. Also instead of PPOCatalog vs. PPORLModule you can title it as Example of catalog in PPORLModule

    of the RLModule. The model config dicts and the view requirements are only of interest in special cases, such as
    recurrent networks or attention networks. The PPORLModule has four components that are created by the PPOCatalog:
    Encoder, value function head, policy head and action distribution. You can find out more about this
    distinction between these components in our section on Models.

    .. image:: images/catalog/ppo_catalog_and_rlm_diagram.svg
        :align: center

Catalogs and AlgorithmConfig
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Since Catalogs effectively control what models and distributions RLlib uses under the hood,
they are also part of RLlib’s configurations. As the primary entry point for configuring RLlib,
AlgorithmConfig is the place where you can configure the Catalogs of the RLModules that are created.
The following example shows how to configure the Catalogs of the RLModules that are created by PPO.

.. literalinclude:: ../../../rllib/examples/catalog/basics/catalogs_in_algo_configs.py
    :language: python
    :start-after: __sphinx_doc_begin__
    :end-before: __sphinx_doc_end__

> .. image:: images/catalog/catalog_rlmspecs_diagram.svg

Author: It's for illustration, not for extra clarification.
When skimming docs, the majority of information I ingest is through pictures.
Basically, users can get an idea of what they are looking at just by looking at the pictures to filter information without putting in lots of effort through reading.
@angelinalg lmk if this is stupid, I'm open to deleting this if I have the wrong idea here.

> .. image:: images/catalog/catalog_rlmspecs_diagram.svg

Reviewer 2: I think you need to add some extra caption to get the intention behind the the image across.

> .. image:: images/catalog/catalog_rlmspecs_diagram.svg

Author: Gotcha, I've updated the illustration a little bit and changed the text around it to get the point across that in case of heterogeneous agents, you'll want to modify the multi-agent rl module spec.

> .. image:: images/catalog/catalog_rlmspecs_diagram.svg

Author: Thanks!

> .. image:: images/catalog/catalog_rlmspecs_diagram.svg

Reviewer 3: Generally it's good to have diagrams for visual learners.

    :align: center

Inject your custom models into RLModules
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

You can make Catalog build custom models by overriding the Catalog’s methods used by RL Modules to build models.
Have a look at these lines from the constructor of the PPORLModules to see how Catalogs are being used by RLModules:

> .. literalinclude:: ../../../rllib/algorithms/ppo/ppo_base_rl_module.py

Author: Afaics, this collides with what Max said here: https://github.com/ray-project/ray/pull/33909#discussion_r1159317847
@maxpumperla do you have a rule here? Or am I misunderstanding on of you?

> .. literalinclude:: ../../../rllib/algorithms/ppo/ppo_base_rl_module.py

Author: Basically, I'm thinking about the risk that code outdates quickly.

> .. literalinclude:: ../../../rllib/algorithms/ppo/ppo_base_rl_module.py

Reviewer 2: The context is a bit different. We want self-contained example code snippets to be tested all the time. But this is more like a high-lighted view of somewhere in the code-base. I think we should just snap that view out and put it in a self-contained context for the purpose of the doc.

> .. literalinclude:: ../../../rllib/algorithms/ppo/ppo_base_rl_module.py

Author: But the problem persists. We state here that the following is a snippet from the constructor of the PPORLModule.
If it is not, but rather a copy of it, the code will be outdated as soon as the constructor is changed.

- Write a Catalog from scratch

Catalog and AlgorithmConfig
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Since Catalogs effectively control what ``models`` and ``distributions`` RLlib uses under the hood,
they are also part of RLlib’s configurations. As the primary entry point for configuring RLlib,
:py:class:`~ray.rllib.algorithms.algorithm_config.AlgorithmConfig` is the place where you can configure the
Catalogs of the RLModules that are created.
You set the ``catalog class`` by going through the :py:class:`~ray.rllib.core.rl_module.rl_module.SingleAgentRLModuleSpec`
or :py:class:`~ray.rllib.core.rl_module.marl_module.MultiAgentRLModuleSpec` of an AlgorithmConfig.
For example, in heterogeneous multi-agent cases, you modify the MultiAgentRLModuleSpec.

.. image:: images/catalog/catalog_rlmspecs_diagram.svg
    :align: center

The following example shows how to configure the Catalog of an :py:class:`~ray.rllib.core.rl_module.rl_module.RLModule`
created by PPO.

.. literalinclude:: ../../../rllib/examples/catalog/basics/catalogs_in_algo_configs.py
    :language: python
    :start-after: __sphinx_doc_begin__
    :end-before: __sphinx_doc_end__

Basic Usage
~~~~~~~~~~~

> The following three examples illustrate three basic usage patterns of Catalogs.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The following three examples illustrate three basic usage patterns of Catalogs.

```

> The following example showcases the general API for interacting with Catalogs.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The first example showcases the general API for interacting with Catalogs.
```

.. literalinclude:: ../../../rllib/examples/catalog/basics/basic_interaction.py
   :language: python
   :start-after: __sphinx_doc_begin__
   :end-before: __sphinx_doc_end__

> The following example showcases how to use the :py:class:`~ray.rllib.algorithms.ppo.ppo_catalog.PPOCatalog`

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The second example showcases how to use the :py:class:`~ray.rllib.algorithms.ppo.ppo_catalog.PPOCatalog`
```

to create a ``models`` and an ``action distribution``.
This is more similar to what RLlib does internally.

.. dropdown:: **Use catalog-generated models**
    :animate: fade-in-slide-down

    .. literalinclude:: ../../../rllib/examples/catalog/basics/cartpole_models_ppo.py
       :language: python
       :start-after: __sphinx_doc_begin__
       :end-before: __sphinx_doc_end__

> The following example showcases how to use the base :py:class:`~ray.rllib.core.models.catalog.Catalog`

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The third example showcases how to use the base :py:class:`~ray.rllib.core.models.catalog.Catalog`
```

These mainly include the ``observation space`` and ``action space`` of the :py:class:`~ray.rllib.core.rl_module.rl_module.RLModule`, the ``model config dict`` and the ``deep learning framework backend``.

The following diagram shows the break down of the information flow towards ``models`` and ``distributions`` within an :py:class:`~ray.rllib.core.rl_module.rl_module.RLModule`.
An :py:class:`~ray.rllib.core.rl_module.rl_module.RLModule` creates an instance of the Catalog class they receive as part of their constructor.
It then create its internal ``models`` and ``distributions`` with the help of this Catalog.

.. note::
    You can also modify :py:class:`~ray.rllib.core.models.Model` or :py:class:`~ray.rllib.models.distributions.Distribution` in an :py:class:`~ray.rllib.core.rl_module.rl_module.RLModule` directly by overriding the RLModule's constructor!

.. image:: images/catalog/catalog_and_rlm_diagram.svg
    :align: center

The following diagram shows a concrete case in more detail.

.. dropdown:: **Example of catalog in a PPORLModule**
    :animate: fade-in-slide-down

>     The :py:class:`~ray.rllib.algorithms.ppo.ppo_catalog.PPOCatalog` is fed an `observation space``, ``action space``,

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    The :py:class:`~ray.rllib.algorithms.ppo.ppo_catalog.PPOCatalog` is fed an ``observation space``, ``action space``,
```

    a ``model config dict`` and the ``view requirements`` of the :py:class:`~ray.rllib.core.rl_module.rl_module.RLModule`.
    The model config dicts and the view requirements are only of interest in special cases, such as
    recurrent networks or attention networks. A PPORLModule has four components that are created by the
    :py:class:`~ray.rllib.algorithms.ppo.ppo_catalog.PPOCatalog`:

>     ``Encoder``, ``value function head``, ``policy head`` and ``action distribution``. You can find out more about this

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    ``Encoder``, ``value function head``, ``policy head``, and ``action distribution``. You can find out more about this
```

>     ``Encoder``, ``value function head``, ``policy head`` and ``action distribution``. You can find out more about this

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    ``Encoder``, ``value function head``, ``policy head`` and ``action distribution``. Find out more about the
```

>     distinction between these components in our section on Models.

Reviewer 3: Do you want to link to the section on Models?

Author: I'm getting rid of this sentence and will add this info back once the section is added...

    .. image:: images/catalog/ppo_catalog_and_rlm_diagram.svg
        :align: center

Inject your custom models into RLModules
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> You can make a :py:class:`~ray.rllib.core.models.catalog.Catalog` build custom ``models`` by overriding the Catalog’s methods used by RL Modules to build ``models``.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
You can make a :py:class:`~ray.rllib.core.models.catalog.Catalog` build custom ``models`` by overriding the Catalog’s methods used by RLModules to build ``models``.
```

Have a look at these lines from the constructor of the :py:class:`~ray.rllib.algorithms.ppo.ppo_torch_rl_module.PPOTorchRLModule` to see how Catalogs are being used by an :py:class:`~ray.rllib.core.rl_module.rl_module.RLModule`:

.. literalinclude:: ../../../rllib/algorithms/ppo/ppo_base_rl_module.py
    :language: python
    :start-after: __sphinx_doc_begin__
    :end-before: __sphinx_doc_end__

Consequently, in order to build a custom :py:class:`~ray.rllib.core.models.Model` compatible with a PPORLModule,
you can override methods by inheriting from :py:class:`~ray.rllib.algorithms.ppo.ppo_catalog.PPOCatalog`
or write a :py:class:`~ray.rllib.core.models.catalog.Catalog` that implements them from scratch.
The following showcases such modifications.

This example shows two things:

- How to write a custom :py:class:`~ray.rllib.models.distributions.Distribution`
- How to inject a custom action distribution into a :py:class:`~ray.rllib.core.models.catalog.Catalog`

.. literalinclude:: ../../../rllib/examples/catalog/custom_action_distribution.py
   :language: python
   :start-after: __sphinx_doc_begin__
   :end-before: __sphinx_doc_end__

> Notable TODOs

Reviewer 3: Do you want to hide this list?

Author: It's not being hidden in other docs we have, but I think it's actually a good idea to hide it.

Author: CC @kouroshHakha
